Open Vehicle Monitoring System

Why?

We are a group of enthusiasts who want an interface to be able to talk to our cars remotely, perhaps
add on-car displays (such as heads-up speed), and we want to have fun doing it.

What is it?

The Open Vehicle Monitoring System is three things:

1] A low-cost module that fits in the car. It is powered by the car, talks to the car on the CAN bus,
   and uses the GSM cellular network to talk to its user.

2] A server. The car module can be configured to either talk to the server (via UDP/IP or TCP/IP over
   the Internet) or the user directly (via SMS).

3] A cellphone App. This talks to the server (via TCP/IP HTTP protocol) to retrieve messages from the
   car and issue instructions.

Part [1] is all that is required. You can use a cellphone and SMS messages to talk to the App. It
requires a SMS messaging plan on the SIM card in the GSM modem in the car.

Parts [2] and [3] provide a much more seamless and powerful experience, but are optional.
They requires a small data plan on the SIM card in the GSM modem in the car.

Even if you choose [2]+[3], you can still use [1] as well (for initial setup as well as ongoing on-demand).

The Car Module

The car module is the hard part. We require an extremely reliable and low-power module to fit in the car.
While it is relatively simple for a hobbyist to create one of these, the hard part is making a common
platform that a group of hobbyists can get behind, and to make it very high quality. Home-soldered
connections and US$100k electric cars don't go well together.

What we've done is take the foundational work done by fuzzy logic and others, to build a base platform module.
We've then negotiated with factories in China (we live just over the border in Hong Kong) to get this
professionally built.

The module plugs into the car DIAG port, which provides both power and a CAN bus connection that the module
can transmit/receive messages on.

The platform itself is based on a PIC18F2680 processor and SIMCOM GSM module. Factory built and assembled,
but based on an open source extendable architecture. You can either buy these modules pre-built, or build
your own. Any profits on the sale of hardware will got to charity.

The SIMCOM GSM module has the ability to send/receive SMS messages, as well as a built-in IP stack for
GPRS communication. It allows the module to talk both communication protocols with very little PIC software
required. We decided to use these modules (rather than USB modems) for reliability reasons, as well as
the SIMCOM built-in support for IP protocol.

The final version re-works the CPU+CAN board to be rectangular and fit as a plug-in piggy-back on the
SIMCOM module we've sourced. We've also re-worked the board layout to separate the CAN bus across a
cicuit-board divide (to keep the CAN signals very simple and physically separated from the rest of the
components). In the final version, we also extend the unused I/O pins of the CPU out on expansion pins
(to allow for such things as in-vehicle displays). It all fits in a small case, is extremely low power,
and has two LEDs for diagnostics and a windscreen / rear window stick-on GSM antenna for optimal
reception. Overall, the design is very elegant and extremely robust.

The in-car module can be configured to just be a passive listener on the CAN bus, but can also be an
active participant and transmit control messages onto the bus. It can even just relay CAN bus messages
over the Internet to the Server/App. It is very flexible and has enough RAM and ROM to do some interesting things.

Users can either follow the schematics to build their own compatible boards, or buy them pre-made from us.
We expect to be able to charge just US$99+shipping for pre-assembled in-car modules (the CPU+CAN controller
module, SIMCOM GSM module, car DIAG cable, housing box and GSM antenna). This is a non-profit endeavor,
with any profits inadvertently made being donated to charity.

The Server

The server is a simple open source server which talks two protocols - one to the car and the other to
the cellphone App.

The car protocol is built on UDP using encrypted communication packets. Two passwords are used - one to
talk to the server and the other to talk to the App.

If the car module wants to send a message to the server, it uses the first password. Once the server
receives the message, it can decrypt and act on the instruction contained. Communications of this type
are used for network registration and PUSH notification messages to Apple/Android phones, or other alerts.

If the car module wants to send a message to the user, it uses the second password. The server has no
ability to decrypt such messages, so merely passes them on to the cellphone App transparently. The
cellphone App itself decrypts and acts on the message. In this way, as only the car module and cellphone
App have the password, the server has no way to spy/eavesdrop on these messages. Communications of this
type are used for such things as car GPS location updates.

The server also includes a web interface for basic functions such as setting the password, registering
the car and checking status.

The CellPhone App

The API to the car and the server is open and will be published. Anyone can write to it, and we hope they will.

Initially, we intend to release a standard iPhone and Android App, but anyone is welcome to follow the API
and write their own.

Open Source

The entire project will be open source - from the hardware schematics to the APIs to the car and server firmware.
We will be loading up what we have onto github within the coming few weeks.

The purpose of this project is to get the community of Tesla, and other, tinkerers to be able to expand the
project. We can't do it all, and there is so much to do. What we are doing is providing an affordable and
flexible base that the community can work on and extend.

Everything is open, and APIs are public. Other car modules can talk to the server, and other Apps can show the
status and control the car. This will be a foundation that will hope others will interface to and and build upon.

When will it be ready?

We have been working hard on this for the past couple of months. Initial prototypes have been made and tested;
and we are very happy with the choice of factory and their work. The hardware design is now being finalized and
we will soon be ready to start the first production run. If there is sufficient interest, final hardware will
be available within the next two-to-three weeks. If we can't get sufficient interest, we'll just build it for
ourselves and not worry about the larger community.

How does it compare to the Tesla Tattler?

The Tattler will be an off-the-shelf product offering a purely-SMS controlled solution to controlling roadster
charging (as well as other such functions). It is built on some fairly sophisticated hardware and requires no
user 'tinkering' to get it working. From our understanding, you just plug it in and play. It connects to the
car in the same way as OVMS, but the cellular modem is very different.

This project is as an open-source extensible framework based on SMS and UDP/IP control, for enthusiasts.
It is designed to be controlled by SMS, websites and/or cellphone Apps.

Thanks

So many people to thank. W.Petefish for sourcing the car connector, Fuzzylogic for the original hardware and
software design and demonstration of it working, Scott451 for figuring out many of the Roadster CAN bus
messages, and many others for showing that this kind of thing can work in the real world.

Please help us by answering the survey, so we can gauge interest. Any questions? Ask away...

Thanks,
markwj and foxium.
